Title: The passerby protocol
Date: 2017-08-05 14:47
Author: real

**Work in progress!**


## Abstract

Passerby is an experimental datagram routing protocol. We present here the
ideas of how Passerby protocol works and provide details about how to
implement it.

The main goal of the Passerby protocol is passing encrypted messages between
nodes in a network with high probability of success.


## Core routing algorithm

The Passerby protocol assumes a connected network of nodes. Every node is
directly connected to a few other nodes in some way. A direct connection could
be a TCP connection over the internet, a direct wifi connection, a direct
bluetooth connection or any other type of connection. It is assumed that the
direct connection two nodes is TCP like: It is reliable and sends messages in
order.

Routing in the network is relies on the existence of Index nodes. Index
nodes are nodes that contain an approximate full map of the network, and they
provide short paths between nodes as a service. Whenever a node $v$ wants to
send a message to some remote node $u$, $v$ first asks for a path from $v$ to
$u$ from one of the index nodes. $v$ then uses that path to send the message
to the node $u$.

Index nodes perform difficult work. An index node deals with much more
bandwidth than a usual node, as it has to keep an updated view of the
network graph. In addition, an index node makes heavy use of its computation
resources to calculate short paths between nodes in the the large network
graph.


## Index nodes setup

As index nodes are crucial for the ability of nodes to route message in the
network, index nodes should be accessible to every node.
To make this work, every index node advertises its existence periodically. This
is done by sending a message to all his direct neighbors in the network,
declaring himself as an index node, signing over a timestamp.

Every node $v$ keeps at all time gateways to the $k$ closest index nodes he
knows of. By gateways we mean that for every closest index node $w$, $v$
remembers some direct neighbor that is a beginning of a path $w$. The gateway
is obtained as the node who first told $v$ about the existence of $w$.

We denote $v$'s list of closest index nodes and their gateways as $L(v)$.
Whenever any node in this list changes, $v$ informs all of his neighbors about
the change. Using this method changes in the state of index nodes in the
network propagates to all the relevant nodes in the network in a short time.

Changes to a nodes best known index nodes list can happen due to finding a new
closer index node, or the expiry of some index node, due to a timestamp being
too old.

## Network indexing

Index nodes maintain an approximate view of the current structure of the
network. A node $v$ sends to some randomly chosen index nodes from $L(v)$ about
his direct connections to his neighbors. A message that contains information
about such connections also contains a signature. This signature is later used
as a proof by the index node. 

As an example: If $v$ has a direct neighbor node $u$, $v$ sends to some
randomly chosen index nodes from $L(v)$ the connection $v \rightarrow u$,
together with a signature of $v$ over $u$. The signature can later be used to
prove that $v$ claimed to be a direct neighbor of $u$. In addition, this
message will contain a signed timestamp by $v$, to show that this direct
connection is not too old. 

Messages about direct connections between nodes are sent in the following
occasions:

- Periodically. This allows indexing nodes to perform a periodic cleanup of
  connections with old timestamps.

- Whenever a connection is formed: If $v$ has a new direct neighbor $u$, he
  will immediately send a message about this connection to some random
  collection of the index nodes in $L(v)$.

- Whenever a connection is lost: If $v$'s direct neighbor $u$ has disconnected,
  $v$ will send a message about this to some random collection of the index
  nodes in $L(v)$.

Whenever an index node $w$ receives a message about a change in the network
structure, it first checks if he have seen this message before (Using some
local cache mechanism). If this message was seen before, it is discarded. If
this message is new, $w$ will send it to all of the index nodes in the list
$L(w)$. We assume that this makes sure that with high probability the message
will arrive at all the index nodes in the network.

TODO: Assuming a connected network, why do we think that the overlay graph of
index nodes is connected? Create an experiment to test this. This is a bit
different than the formation of colored towers. Add here references to our
experiments.

An index node considers a direct connection to exist between two nodes $v$ and
$u$ if and only if both $v$ and $u$ have reported and signed over the existence
of this direct connection.


## Querying for paths

Whenever a node $v$ wants to send a message to some remote node $u$, $v$ first
needs to know about a path of nodes from $v$ to $u$. This is done by asking an
some index nodes for a path.

$v$ chooses a random index node $w$ from $L(v)$ and sends him a request for a path
from $v$ to $u$. The index node $w$ generates a path from $v$ to $u$ as follows:

1. Choose a random node $x$ from all the nodes that he knows of.

2. Find a shortest path from $v$ to $x$.

3. Find a shortest path from $x$ to $u$.

4. Concatenate the paths, possibly removing cycles.

5. Send the resulting path to $v$.

$v$ then checks the returned path from $v$ to $u$, and verifies all the
signatures. If the path is valid, it can be used to send messages to $u$.


## Main limitations

- Synchronization:
    - We use the time on node's machines as a source of time for timestamps. The
      time between different nodes might not be synchronized well. We plan to solve
      this problem in future designs using a distributed and secure source of time.

- Scalability: 
    - It is possible that it might become very difficult for index nodes to
      maintain the full structure of the network and find shortest paths in
      it as the network becomes very large. However, it seems like this should
      be manageable for pretty large networks.

- Compensation:
    - It is bandwidth and CPU consuming to be an Index node, however, Index node
      operators are not compensated for this extra effort. In addition, the direct
      neighbors of an index node will probably suffer too from In the future we could
      use some kind of monetary incentive to compenstate Index node owners.

    - Nodes that relay more data on the network are not compensated for their
      work.


## Passerby router interface

The passerby router is a state machine. It communicates using the following
messages:

Input messages:

- **Initialize(privateKey, currentTime)**
    Initialize the state machine.

- **TimeTick(currentTime)**
    Information about the current time.

- **PortConnected(neighborIdHash)**
    A new port was connected to the passerby router.

- **PortDisconnected(neighborIdHash)**
    A port was disconnected from the passerby router.

- **MsgFromPort(portId, msg)**
    Message was received from a given port.

- **SendMessage(remoteNodeIdHash, datagramData)**
    A request to send a message to a remote node id hash.


Output messages:

- **MsgToPort(portId, msg)**
    A request to send message through port portId.

- **MessageReceived(remoteNodeIdHash, datagramData)**
    A remote message was received from remoteNodeIdHash.


Node id hashes are of size $120$ bits ($15$ bytes). This allows them to fit into
IPv6 address space of [private
addresses](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Unique_local_address) (All ipv6
addresses that begin with the byte 0xfc).

The structure of msg in MsgFromPort and MsgToPort is as follows:

- messageType
- payload

We rely on a service external to the Passerby router to cut the stream of bytes
into frames of discrete messages.


## Messages between routing engines

TODO: Edit this (Messages from old protocol):


For any direct connection with a neighboring node, the
following messages can be transferred:

- **LowestNodes**(nodeList) [L0]
  nodeList is a list with elements of the form:
  (heightIndex, nodeId, timestamp, sign{nodeId}(timestamp))
  This message is sent periodically between neighboring nodes. The lowest node
  ids are used to approximate the amount of nodes in the network.

- **LowestNodesPinned**(batchIndex, nodeList) [L0]
  nodeList is a list with elements of the form:
  (heightIndex, nodeId, timestamp, sign{nodeId}(timestamp))
  batchIndex is the index of the batch this pinned lowest nodes set refers to.

- **UpdatedLocalTowerPath**(batchIndex, towerColor, SignedPathFromTower) [L0]
  Used both for new choice of a local tower, or changes in the network
  layout. This message is sent periodically, originating from tower nodes.

```
localTower,   timestamp                  
a_1,          sign{localTower}(a_1, prev)
a_2,          sign{a_1}(a_2, prev)       
...
a_k,          sign{a_{k-1}}(a_k, prev)
```

- **RegisterLocalTower**(batchIndex, towerColor, SignedPathToTower) [L0]
  A node registers with a local tower.

```
nodeId,       timestamp              
a_1,          sign{nodeId}(a_1, prev)
a_2,          sign{a_1}(a_2, prev)   
...
localTower,   sign{a_{k-1}}(localTower, prev)
```
  The local tower will keep knowledge of paths to all nodes in the given
  chain of signatures.

- **MsgByTowerColor**(batchIndex, towerColor, senderNodeId, signedContent) [L0]
  This message allows to send content to a local colored tower.

- **MsgByPath**(batchIndex, nodeIdPath, senderNodeId, signedContent) [L0]
  Where nodeIdPath is a path of nodeIds.
  This message allows to send content to a remote node using a path of nodeIds.

signedContent is of the form:

- timestamp
- nonce
- msgType
- payload
- signature: Sign{key=senderNodeId}(all message)

## Messages between nodes and towers


- **SendMessageLocalTower**(destNodeId, encContent) [L1]
  Sent over MsgByTowerColor
  Send a message with given content to a destination id.
  originates at some node and arrives at a local tower.

- **MessageReceivedLocalTower**(encContent) [L1]
  Sent over MsgByPath
  A message received through the local tower with given content.
  This message originates at a local tower and arrives at the relevant node.

The structure for `encContent` in MessageReceivedLocalTower is as follows:

- senderPublicKey (senderNodeId)
- encSymmetricKey == Encrypt{key=senderPrivateKey}(symmetricKey)
- encDatagramData == Encrypt{key=symmetricKey, nonce=random}(timestamp, datagramData)


## Maintained data structures for every node

TODO


## Algorithm for every node

The following represents an algorithm of operation for a node with node id
myNodeId.



